1984
18
by  the  Thought  Police.  He  was  the  commander  of  a  vast
shadowy  army,  an  underground  network  of  conspirators
dedicated  to  the  overthrow  of  the  State.  The  Brotherhood,
its  name  was  supposed  to  be.  There  were  also  whispered
stories of a terrible book, a compendium of all the heresies,
of  which  Goldstein  was  the  author  and  which  circulated
clandestinely  here  and  there.  It  was  a  book  without  a  title.
People referred to it, if at all, simply as THE BOOK. But one
knew of such things only through vague rumours. Neither
the Brotherhood nor THE BOOK was a subject that any or
-
dinary Party member would mention if there was a way of
avoiding it.
In  its  second  minute  the  Hate  rose  to  a  frenzy.  People
were  leaping  up  and  down  in  their  places  and  shouting
at  the  tops  of  their  voices  in  an  effort  to  drown  the  mad
-
dening  bleating  voice  that  came  from  the  screen.  The
little  sandy-haired  woman  had  turned  bright  pink,  and
her mouth was opening and shutting like that of a landed
fish. Even O’Brien’s heavy face was flushed. He was sitting
very  straight  in  his  chair,  his  powerful  chest  swelling  and
quivering as though he were standing up to the assault of a
wave. The dark-haired girl behind Winston had begun cry
-
ing out ‘Swine! Swine! Swine!’ and suddenly she picked up
a  heavy  Newspeak  dictionary  and  flung  it  at  the  screen.  It
struck  Goldstein’s  nose  and  bounced  off;  the  voice  contin
-
ued inexorably. In a lucid moment Winston found that he
was  shouting  with  the  others  and  kicking  his  heel  violent
-
ly  against  the  rung  of  his  chair.  The  horrible  thing  about
the Two Minutes Hate was not that one was obliged to act
19

a part, but, on the contrary, that it was impossible to avoid
joining in. Within thirty seconds any pretence was always
unnecessary.  A  hideous  ecstasy  of  fear  and  vindictiveness,
a  desire  to  kill,  to  torture,  to  smash  faces  in  with  a  sledge-
hammer, seemed to flow through the whole group of people
like an electric current, turning one even against one’s will
into a grimacing, screaming lunatic. And yet the rage that
one  felt  was  an  abstract,  undirected  emotion  which  could
be switched from one object to another like the flame of a
blowlamp. Thus, at one moment Winston’s hatred was not
turned against Goldstein at all, but, on the contrary, against
Big Brother, the Party, and the Thought Police; and at such
moments  his  heart  went  out  to  the  lonely,  derided  heretic
on the screen, sole guardian of truth and sanity in a world
of lies. And yet the very next instant he was at one with the
people about him, and all that was said of Goldstein seemed
to him to be true. At those moments his secret loathing of
Big Brother changed into adoration, and Big Brother seemed
to tower up, an invincible, fearless protector, standing like
a  rock  against  the  hordes  of  Asia,  and  Goldstein,  in  spite
of  his  isolation,  his  helplessness,  and  the  doubt  that  hung
about his very existence, seemed like some sinister enchant
-
er, capable by the mere power of his voice of wrecking the
structure of civilization.
It  was  even  possible,  at  moments,  to  switch  one’s  ha
-
tred  this  way  or  that  by  a  voluntary  act.  Suddenly,  by  the
sort  of  violent  effort  with  which  one  wrenches  one’s  head
away  from  the  pillow  in  a  nightmare,  Winston  succeeded
in  transferring  his  hatred  from  the  face  on  the  screen  to
1984
0
the dark-haired girl behind him. Vivid, beautiful hallucina
-
tions flashed through his mind. He would flog her to death
with a rubber truncheon. He would tie her naked to a stake
and shoot her full of arrows like Saint Sebastian. He would
ravish her and cut her throat at the moment of climax. Bet
-
ter than before, moreover, he realized WHY it was that he
hated her. He hated her because she was young and pretty
and  sexless,  because  he  wanted  to  go  to  bed  with  her  and
would  never  do  so,  because  round  her  sweet  supple  waist,
which seemed to ask you to encircle it with your arm, there
was only the odious scarlet sash, aggressive symbol of chas
-
tity.
The  Hate  rose  to  its  climax.  The  voice  of  Goldstein  had
become an actual sheep’s bleat, and for an instant the face
changed into that of a sheep. Then the sheep-face melted into
the figure of a Eurasian soldier who seemed to be advancing,
huge and terrible, his sub-machine gun roaring, and seem
-
ing to spring out of the surface of the screen, so that some
of the people in the front row actually flinched backwards
in their seats. But in the same moment, drawing a deep sigh
of relief from everybody, the hostile figure melted into the
face  of  Big  Brother,  black-haired,  black-moustachio’d,  full
of  power  and  mysterious  calm,  and  so  vast  that  it  almost
filled  up  the  screen.  Nobody  heard  what  Big  Brother  was
saying.  It  was  merely  a  few  words  of  encouragement,  the
sort of words that are uttered in the din of battle, not distin
-
guishable individually but restoring confidence by the fact
of  being  spoken.  Then  the  face  of  Big  Brother  faded  away
again, and instead the three slogans of the Party stood out
1
in bold capitals:
WAR IS PEACE
FREEDOM IS SLAVERY
IGNORANCE IS STRENGTH
But  the  face  of  Big  Brother  seemed  to  persist  for  sever
-
al seconds on the screen, as though the impact that it had
made  on  everyone’s  eyeballs  was  too  vivid  to  wear  off  im
-
mediately. The little sandy-haired woman had flung herself
forward  over  the  back  of  the  chair  in  front  of  her.  With  a
tremulous murmur that sounded like ‘My Saviour!’ she ex
-
tended  her  arms  towards  the  screen.  Then  she  buried  her
face  in  her  hands.  It  was  apparent  that  she  was  uttering  a
prayer.
At this moment the entire group of people broke into a
deep, slow, rhythmical chant of ‘B-B!...B-B!’—over and over
again,  very  slowly,  with  a  long  pause  between  the  first  ‘B’
and  the  second—a  heavy,  murmurous  sound,  somehow
curiously  savage,  in  the  background  of  which  one  seemed
to  hear  the  stamp  of  naked  feet  and  the  throbbing  of  tom-
toms.  For  perhaps  as  much  as  thirty  seconds  they  kept  it
up.  It  was  a  refrain  that  was  often  heard  in  moments  of
overwhelming emotion. Partly it was a sort of hymn to the
wisdom  and  majesty  of  Big  Brother,  but  still  more  it  was
an act of self-hypnosis, a deliberate drowning of conscious
-
ness by means of rhythmic noise. Winston’s entrails seemed
to  grow  cold.  In  the  Two  Minutes  Hate  he  could  not  help
sharing in the general delirium, but this sub-human chant
-
1984

ing of ‘B-B!...B-B!’ always filled him with horror. Of course
he chanted with the rest: it was impossible to do otherwise.
To dissemble your feelings, to control your face, to do what
everyone  else  was  doing,  was  an  instinctive  reaction.  But
there was a space of a couple of seconds during which the
expression of his eyes might conceivably have betrayed him.
And it was exactly at this moment that the significant thing
happened—if, indeed, it did happen.
Momentarily he caught O’Brien’s eye. O’Brien had stood
up.  He  had  taken  off  his  spectacles  and  was  in  the  act  of
resettling them on his nose with his characteristic gesture.
But  there  was  a  fraction  of  a  second  when  their  eyes  met,
and for as long as it took to happen Winston knew—yes, he
KNEW!—that O’Brien was thinking the same thing as him
-
self. An unmistakable message had passed. It was as though
their two minds had opened and the thoughts were flowing
from one into the other through their eyes. ‘I am with you,’
O’Brien seemed to be saying to him. ‘I know precisely what
you  are  feeling.  I  know  all  about  your  contempt,  your  ha
-
tred, your disgust. But don’t worry, I am on your side!’ And
then  the  flash  of  intelligence  was  gone,  and  O’Brien’s  face
was as inscrutable as everybody else’s.
That was all, and he was already uncertain whether it had
happened. Such incidents never had any sequel. All that they
did  was  to  keep  alive  in  him  the  belief,  or  hope,  that  oth
-
ers besides himself were the enemies of the Party. Perhaps
the  rumours  of  vast  underground  conspiracies  were  true
after  all—perhaps  the  Brotherhood  really  existed!  It  was
impossible,  in  spite  of  the  endless  arrests  and  confessions

and  executions,  to  be  sure  that  the  Brotherhood  was  not
simply a myth. Some days he believed in it, some days not.
There  was  no  evidence,  only  fleeting  glimpses  that  might
mean  anything  or  nothing:  snatches  of  overheard  conver
-
sation, faint scribbles on lavatory walls—once, even, when
two  strangers  met,  a  small  movement  of  the  hand  which
had looked as though it might be a signal of recognition. It
was all guesswork: very likely he had imagined everything.
He had gone back to his cubicle without looking at O’Brien
again.  The  idea  of  following  up  their  momentary  contact
hardly crossed his mind. It would have been inconceivably
dangerous even if he had known how to set about doing it.
For a second, two seconds, they had exchanged an equivo
-
cal glance, and that was the end of the story. But even that
was  a  memorable  event,  in  the  locked  loneliness  in  which
one had to live.
Winston roused himself and sat up straighter. He let out
a belch. The gin was rising from his stomach.
His  eyes  re-focused  on  the  page.  He  discovered  that
while he sat helplessly musing he had also been writing, as
though by automatic action. And it was no longer the same
cramped, awkward handwriting as before. His pen had slid
voluptuously over the smooth paper, printing in large neat
capitals—DOWN  WITH  BIG  BROTHER  DOWN  WITH
BIG  BROTHER  DOWN  WITH  BIG  BROTHER  DOWN
WITH BIG BROTHER DOWN WITH BIG BROTHER
over and over again, filling half a page.
He  could  not  help  feeling  a  twinge  of  panic.  It  was  ab
-
surd,  since  the  writing  of  those  particular  words  was  not
1984
4
more  dangerous  than  the  initial  act  of  opening  the  diary,
but  for  a  moment  he  was  tempted  to  tear  out  the  spoiled
pages and abandon the enterprise altogether.
He did not do so, however, because he knew that it was
useless. Whether he wrote DOWN WITH BIG BROTHER,
or  whether  he  refrained  from  writing  it,  made  no  differ
-
ence. Whether he went on with the diary, or whether he did
not go on with it, made no difference. The Thought Police
would  get  him  just  the  same.  He  had  committed—would
still  have  committed,  even  if  he  had  never  set  pen  to  pa
-
per—the  essential  crime  that  contained  all  others  in  itself.
Thoughtcrime, they called it. Thoughtcrime was not a thing
that could be concealed for ever. You might dodge success
-
fully  for  a  while,  even  for  years,  but  sooner  or  later  they
were bound to get you.
It was always at night—the arrests invariably happened
at night. The sudden jerk out of sleep, the rough hand shak
-
ing your shoulder, the lights glaring in your eyes, the ring of
hard faces round the bed. In the vast majority of cases there
was  no  trial,  no  report  of  the  arrest.  People  simply  disap
-
peared,  always  during  the  night.  Your  name  was  removed
from the registers, every record of everything you had ever
done  was  wiped  out,  your  one-time  existence  was  denied
and  then  forgotten.  You  were  abolished,  annihilated:  VA
-
PORIZED was the usual word.
For a moment he was seized by a kind of hysteria. He be
-
gan writing in a hurried untidy scrawl:
theyll shoot me i don’t care theyll shoot me in the back of the

neck i dont care down with big brother they always shoot you
in the back of the neck i dont care down with big brother——
He sat back in his chair, slightly ashamed of himself, and
laid  down  the  pen.  The  next  moment  he  started  violently.
There was a knocking at the door.
Already! He sat as still as a mouse, in the futile hope that
whoever it was might go away after a single attempt. But no,
the knocking was repeated. The worst thing of all would be
to delay. His heart was thumping like a drum, but his face,
from long habit, was probably expressionless. He got up and
moved heavily towards the door.